---
layout: post
title: "Cleanup"
desciption: "The joy of doing cleanup work"
tags: [software]
---

I've been working a lot on the code for [Citrus Circuits'](http://www.citruscircuits.org/) 2017 robot. I just spent about 3 hours doing code cleanup, which I've found that I actually really enjoy. It's an easy way to make a bunch of low-stress, helpful changes. I've also found a couple cool bash one-liners that helped me out. Here they are:

### Find any files with trailing whitespace:
```
find . -type f -exec egrep -l " +$" {} +
```

This one is pretty self explanatory - it shows a list of files with any trailing whitespace. This is taken mostly from [this](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/11210126/bash-find-files-with-trailing-spaces-at-the-end-of-the-lines) stack overflow post, with one small change to make it faster.

Note that it's up to you to actually choose what to do about the whitespace - this just lists all the files.

### List include guards
```
find . | grep \\.h$ | grep -v "third_party" | xargs head -n 3 | less
```

This requires a bit more explanation - On 1678, we use the [Google C++ Style Guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html). Part of the style guide are "include guards". These are `#define` and `#ifndef` statements that stop headers from multiple inclusion errors. To make sure each file has a unique include guard, the include guard is defined based on file name. So, for example `foo/bar/baz.h` would look like this:

{% highlight cpp %}
#ifndef FOO_BAR_BAZ_H_
#define FOO_BAR_BAZ_H_

// code goes here

#endif
{% endhighlight %}

This works fine, except when lazy humans get involved. Because typing is a _lot_ of work, and it's really easy to copy paste, and have include guards get out of sync with file names.

The command above will list the filename and first 3 lines of each header file - enough to see if the include guard matches up. It also excludes any directory with `third_party` in it - that's where we store third party code, and I don't want to have to look through all of that!

I found a ton of issues with this script, from files that were just completely wrong, to multiple files with the same include guard! I can't wait for something like [`#pragma once`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pragma_once) to be standard!

## Conclusion

Overall, it was interesting to see just how much copy-pasting there was going on. A small issue in one file can quickly become an issue in a ton of files if people use it as a reference implementation.

Another thing that I noticed is the importance of being nitpicky about formatting in the review process - as that's the best chance to actually fix something. After that, it takes way more effort to get things fixed.

I was also surprised at how much fun doing code cleanup was - it feels really nice and is super easy to do!
